# Critters

I recently saw a YouTube video where a number of generative AIs were put through an introductory CS course at Cornell University. The video was very interesting, but one of the most interesting things was one of the assignments from the class. For the final project in this class, the students created an artificial life simulation. The simulation had a world populated by "critters." The critters' behaviors were described by their genome, which was represented in a simple programming language. The program could be mutated when the critter reproduced and there were rules to ensure that the mutated genome remained valid. 

I have been interested in artificial life for a long time. I read [Steven Levy's *Artificial Life: A Report from the Frontier Where Computers Meet Biology*](https://www.amazon.com/Artificial-Life-Frontier-Computers-Biology/dp/0679743898/) back in the early 90s. I was in college, I had either just changed my major to computer science or was perhaps still just considering it. I was fascinated by the idea that life is a property of organization and not of biology, and that if this is true, why can´t a computer program be consider alive? I remember reading about [Conway's Game of Life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life), and about how the complicated flocking behaviors of birds could be explained by simple rules that relied only on each bird responding to his immediate neighbors. Later, I encountered the [Core War](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Core_War) game and how some of these warrior programs used genetic algorithms and would evolve.

I have been working through the [boot.dev](https://boot.dev/) curriculum to try and breathe some life into my atrophied coding chops. I have hit the point in the course where you pick your own project, so I have decided that I will implement CritterWorld, or at least a piece of it. The idea for this project is to building something in the absence of a tutorial and on the order of 20-40 hours of work. The CritterWorld assignment has a specification, but not a tutorial. The scope of work is significantly larger, though. It's an approximately 3 month long project and it looks like it is done in teams of 2-4. It is however broken down into four sub-parts, so I am going to begin by tackling the first sub-part - a parser, pretty-printer, and fault-injector for the critter genome language. Once I get through that, I'll see about continuing on to the next part - an interpreter for the critter genomes, a simulator for the critters in their environment, and a console interface for interacting with the simulation. Part 3 is to put a GUI on top of the simulation. Finally, in part 4, the simulator is moved to a client-server model, with the simulation able to interact with multiple clients over the network simultaneously. We'll see how far I get.
